Docs: Add resource handler topic (#824)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/create-a-plugin/extend-a-plugin/add-resource-handler.md

---
id: add-resource-handler
title: Add resource handler for data source plugins

> description: Add a resource handler for data source plugins.

Author: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to add a resource handler for data source plugins.
```

keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - data source
  - datasource
  - resource
  - resource handler
---

# Add resource handler for data source plugins

> You can add a resource handler to your data source to extend the Grafana HTTP API with your own data source-specific routes. This guide explains why you may want to add [resource](/introduction/backend-plugins#resources) handlers and some common ways for doing so.

Reviewer: I think this one is the last outstanding issue

> You can add a resource handler to your data source to extend the Grafana HTTP API with your own data source-specific routes. This guide explains why you may want to add [resource](/introduction/backend-plugins#resources) handlers and some common ways for doing so.

Reviewer: Optimal to change the title but it becomes very long so suggest wait with that until following up the related issue for app plugins. 

```suggestion
You can add a resource handler to your data source backend to extend the Grafana HTTP API with your own data source-specific routes. This guide explains why you may want to add [resource](/introduction/backend-plugins#resources) handlers and some common ways for doing so.
```

Resource handler are also useful for building control panels that allow the user to write back to the data source. For example, you could add a resource handler to update the state of an IoT device.

## Implement the resource handler interface

To add a resource handler to your backend plugin, you need to implement the `backend.CallResourceHandler` interface for your data source struct.

```go
func (d *MyDatasource) CallResource(ctx context.Context, req *backend.CallResourceRequest, sender backend.CallResourceResponseSender) error {
    return sender.Send(&backend.CallResourceResponse{
        Status: http.StatusOK,
        Body: []byte("Hello, world!"),
    })
}
```

You can then access your resources through the following endpoint: `http://<grafana instance host:port>/api/datasources/uid/<DATASOURCE_IUD>/resources`

In this example code, `DATASOURCE_UID` is the data source unique identifier (UID) that uniquely identifies your data source.

:::tip

> To verify the data source UID, you can enter `window.grafanaBootData.settings.datasources` in the Browser Developer Tools Console, to list all the configured data sources in your Grafana instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To verify the data source UID, you can enter `window.grafanaBootData.settings.datasources` in your browser's developer tools console, to list all the configured data sources in your Grafana instance.
```

Not sure all the capitals are necessary?

		return sender.Send(&backend.CallResourceResponse{
			Status: http.StatusOK,
			Body:   []byte(`{ projects: ["project-1", "project-2"] }`),
		})
	default:
		return sender.Send(&backend.CallResourceResponse{
			Status: http.StatusNotFound,
		})
	}
}
```

You can also query your resources using the `getResource` and `postResource` helpers from the `DataSourceWithBackend` class.

For example, in your query editor component, you can access the data source instance from the `props` object:

```
const namespaces = await props.datasource.getResource('namespaces');
props.datasource.postResource('device', { state: "on" });
```

## Advanced use cases

If you have some more advanced use cases or want to use a more Go-agnostic approach for handling resources, you can use the regular [`http.Handler`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Handler). You can do so by using a package provided by the [Grafana Plugin SDK for Go](../../introduction/grafana-plugin-sdk-for-go.md) named [`httpadapter`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/resource/httpadapter). This package provides support for handling resource calls using an [`http.Handler`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Handler).

> What’s interesting with using [`http.Handler`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Handler) is that you can use it with Go’s builtin router functionality called [`ServeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ServeMux) or use your preferred HTTP router library (for example, [`gorilla/mux`](https://github.com/gorilla/mux)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What’s interesting with using [`http.Handler`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Handler) is that you can use it with Go’s built-in router functionality called [`ServeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ServeMux) or use your preferred HTTP router library (for example, [`gorilla/mux`](https://github.com/gorilla/mux)).
```

Reviewer 2: "What's interesting" seems more conversational than usual and we don't really explain why its useful to use ServeMux or other libraries. Not a blocker, just a suggestion
```suggestion
Using [`http.Handler`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Handler) allows you to also use Go’s built-in router functionality called [`ServeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ServeMux) or your preferred HTTP router library (for example, [`gorilla/mux`](https://github.com/gorilla/mux)).
```

> An alternative to using the [`CallResource` method shown in the above example](#add-resource-handler-for-data-source-plugins) is to use [`httpadapter`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/resource/httpadapter) and [`ServeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ServeMux) as shown below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alternative to using the `CallResource` method shown in the [above example](#implement-the-resource-handler-interface) is to use [`httpadapter`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/resource/httpadapter) and [`ServeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ServeMux) as shown below:
```

Link didn't work and having code blocks in links still looks bad.

	return d.resourceHandler.CallResource(ctx, req)
}

func (d *MyDatasource) handleNamespaces(rw http.ResponseWriter, req *http.Request) {
	_, err := rw.Write([]byte(`{ namespaces: ["ns-1", "ns-2"] }`))
	if err != nil {
		return
	}
	rw.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
}

func (d *MyDatasource) handleProjects(rw http.ResponseWriter, req *http.Request) {
	_, err := rw.Write([]byte(`{ projects: ["project-1", "project-2"] }`))
	if err != nil {
		return
	}
	rw.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
}
```

:::note

Using some other HTTP router library with above example should be straightforward. Just replace the use of [`ServeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ServeMux) with another router.

:::

### What if you need access to the backend plugin context?

Use the `PluginConfigFromContext` function to access `backend.PluginContext`:

```
func (d *MyDatasource) handleNamespaces(rw http.ResponseWriter, req *http.Request) {
	pCtx := httpadapter.PluginConfigFromContext(req.Context())

	bytes, err := json.Marshal(pCtx.User)
	if err != nil {
		rw.WriteHeader(http.StatusInternalServerError)
	}

	_, err := rw.Write(bytes)
	if err != nil {
		return
	}
	rw.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
}
```

> ### Additional examples

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Additional examples
```

Some other examples of using resource handlers and the [`httpadapter`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/resource/httpadapter) package:

> - [datasource-basic](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/tree/main/examples/datasource-basic) example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [datasource-basic](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/tree/main/examples/datasource-basic) example:
```

  - [fetch](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/blob/309228fffb09c092c08dbd3d17f45a656b2ec3c6/examples/datasource-basic/src/components/QueryEditor/QueryEditor.tsx#L15) and [populate query types in a drop-down](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/blob/309228fffb09c092c08dbd3d17f45a656b2ec3c6/examples/datasource-basic/src/components/QueryEditor/QueryEditor.tsx#L42) in the query editor component in the frontend. Fetching is done in a [separate function](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/blob/309228fffb09c092c08dbd3d17f45a656b2ec3c6/examples/datasource-basic/src/components/QueryEditor/useQueryTypes.tsx#L13) which calls the [getAvailableQueryTypes function of the datasource](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/blob/309228fffb09c092c08dbd3d17f45a656b2ec3c6/examples/datasource-basic/src/datasource.ts#L21-L23).

> - Built-in TestData datasource, [create resource handler](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/5687243d0b3bad06c4da809f925cfdf3d32c5a16/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/testdata.go#L45) and [register routes](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/5687243d0b3bad06c4da809f925cfdf3d32c5a16/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/resource_handler.go#L17-L28).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Grafana's built-in TestData datasource, [create resource handler](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/5687243d0b3bad06c4da809f925cfdf3d32c5a16/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/testdata.go#L45) and [register routes](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/5687243d0b3bad06c4da809f925cfdf3d32c5a16/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/resource_handler.go#L17-L28).
```

---
id: add-resource-handler

> title: Add resource handler for data source plugins

Author: I've captured this suggestion here: https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/issues/878

description: Add a resource handler for data source plugins.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - data source
  - datasource
  - resource
  - resource handler
---

# Add resource handler for data source plugins

You can add a resource handler to your data source to extend the Grafana HTTP API with your own data source-specific routes. This guide explains why you may want to add resource handlers and some common ways for doing so.

> ## Uses of resource handlers

Author: added this link, good idea.

    })
}
```

You can then access your resources through the following endpoint: `https://community.grafana.com/api/datasources/<DATASOURCE_ID>/resources/`

In this example code, `DATASOURCE_ID` is an integer that uniquely identifies your data source.

:::tip

To verify the data source ID, you can enter `window.grafanaBootData.settings.datasources` in the Developer Console, to list all the data source definitions in your Grafana instance.

:::

## Add support for multiple routes

To support multiple routes in your data source plugin, you can use a switch with the `req.Path`:

```
func (d *MyDatasource) CallResource(ctx context.Context, req *backend.CallResourceRequest, sender backend.CallResourceResponseSender) error {
	switch req.Path {
	case "namespaces":
		return sender.Send(&backend.CallResourceResponse{
			Status: http.StatusOK,
			Body:   []byte(`{ namespaces: ["ns-1", "ns-2"] }`),
		})
	case "projects":
		return sender.Send(&backend.CallResourceResponse{
			Status: http.StatusOK,
			Body:   []byte(`{ projects: ["project-1", "project-2"] }`),
		})
	default:
		return sender.Send(&backend.CallResourceResponse{
			Status: http.StatusNotFound,
		})
	}
}
```

> With this, your plugin now has its own REST API that you can query from your query editor, using `BackendSrv.fetch()`.

Author: done.

Using some other HTTP router library with above example should be straightforward. Just replace the use of [`ServeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ServeMux) with another router.

:::

### Additional examples

Some other examples of using the [`httpadapter`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/resource/httpadapter) package can be found for some of the built-in Grafana data sources:

- Test data source [grafana/testdata.go](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/30aa24a18396f61bfbcbfbeee78b1c0d23685fc3/pkg/tsdb/testdatasource/testdata.go#L41-L42) at 30aa24a18396f61bfbcbfbeee78b1c0d23685fc3 - See code at the [grafana/grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/30aa24a18396f61bfbcbfbeee78b1c0d23685fc3/pkg/tsdb/testdatasource/testdata.go#L41-L42) repo.
- Test data source [grafana/resource_handler.go](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/30aa24a18396f61bfbcbfbeee78b1c0d23685fc3/pkg/tsdb/testdatasource/resource_handler.go#L18) at 30aa24a18396f61bfbcbfbeee78b1c0d23685fc3 - See code at the [grafana/grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/30aa24a18396f61bfbcbfbeee78b1c0d23685fc3/pkg/tsdb/testdatasource/resource_handler.go#L18) repo.

> ### What if you need access to the backend plugin context?

Reviewer: I would suggest this section to go before the examples section.

Author: done.

Use the `PluginConfigFromContext` function to access `backend.PluginContext`:

```
func (d *MyDatasource) handleNamespaces(rw http.ResponseWriter, req *http.Request) {
	pCtx := httpadapter.PluginConfigFromContext(req.Context())

	bytes, err := json.Marshal(pCtx.User)
	if err != nil {
		rw.WriteHeader(http.StatusInternalServerError)
	}

	_, err := rw.Write(bytes)
	if err != nil {
		return
	}
	rw.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
}
```

> Adding resource handlers to your backend plugins opens up more ways to make your plugin more dynamic.

Author: agreed. removed it.
